Please note:

This file is under construction and will be updated several times during the next few weeks.  You can contact me at john@nichcom.com if
you have questions or suggestions.


You can configure a web server as a Niles GXR-2 controller and then use Siri to voice control the GXR-2 through the use of shortcuts.  The concept is simple.  
The Niles uses command strings to select zones and input devices, turn the volume up or down, and go to a previous or next selection.  These strings can be 
created and sent using a web server with a php page.  A set of siri shortcuts can be crafted on an iPhone to send URLs with imbedded information to the 
web server.  The php page uses the imbedded information to customize the command strings and then send them to the GXR-2.  I chose to demonstrate this concept
on an apache web server hosted on a Raspberry Pi.  However, you can host it on any web server with php support.

		siri -> web server -> php -> GXR-2

Please note that this project assumes that you have access to a properly configured Niles GXR-2.  Also, these instructions refer to a test implementation of 
apache on a raspberry pi.  You can modify them accordingly for other platforms/web servers.


Overview for apache on Raspberry Pi:

I.	On a PC 

	Use the raspberry pi imager to create a bootable micro SD card from a Raspberry Pi OS image.
	

II.	On the raspberry pi

	1.  Connect the display, keyboard, and mouse (needed for configuration only).
	2.  Insert a micro SD card containing the Raspberry Pi OS image into the raspberry pi, power it up, and complete the startup configuration.
	3.  Configure the wireless connection for access to your local network.
	4.  Install Apache and PHP.
	6.  Copy the siri.php file from github repository.
	7.  Connect the pi's wired connection to the Expansion port of the Niles GXR-2.  

	Warning:  The Niles GXR-2 has 12 RJ-45 female ports that are used for controllers.  These ports send power to the controllers using a 
	non-standard DC voltage via pins 7 and 8.  Also, pins 4 and 5 are used to transfer ir remote signals from controllers to the GXR-2.  
	Therefore, making a connection from the wired port on the Raspberry Pi to any of the controller ports on the Niles GXR-2 may damage 
	the raspberry pi and/or the GXR-2.  Make sure you are connecting the wired port from the Raspberry Pi to the port labeled "Expansion" on
	the GXR-2.
	
	8.  Record the IP address of your raspberry pi's wireless connection for use in the shortcut(s).  Please note Dynamically assigned 
	    addresses may change over time.  Therefore, it may be necessary to set up a reservation in your DHCP server to guarantee that you'll 
	    always be issued that address. To do so, search for "DHCP reservations" for your specific router. 


III.	On your iPhone
	
	1.  Create and test first shortcut on your Iphone to Get contents of URL.
	2.  Add additional shortcut(s) as required.


Details

Items required:

  	Raspberry pi 3 or above with appropriate power supply (a power supply with an on/off switch is preferred)
	Raspberry pi case (Optional)
	Micro SD card
	HDMI monitor
	HDMI cable (Raspberry Pi 3) or Micro HDMI to Standard HDMI cable (Raspberry Pi 4) 
	Keyboard with touch pad or mouse
	Computer with SD card reader (used to download and install the raspberry pi operating system on the Micro SD card)
	Access to a wireless Ethernet LAN with internet access
	Access to a Niles GXR-2 controller in working condition
	Ethernet patch cable (raspberry pi wired LAN to GXR-2 expansion port)
	An iPhone 6 or above with IOS 15 and functioning Siri

Creating the raspberry pi OS image on a computer capable of running the raspberry pi imager

	a.  Navigate to www.raspberrypi.com
	b.  Download and install the raspberry pi imager
	c.  Insert a micro SD card into the PC
	d.  Open the raspberry pi imager
	e.  Click on Choose Operating System, then click on Raspberry Pi OS fom the menu that displays
	f.  Click on Choose Storage, then click on SDHC Card from the menu that displays
	g.  Click on Write.  
	h.  After the imager finishes creating and verifying the operating system, click on Continue and then close the 
	    imager by clicking on the X in the upper right corner of the appSelect
	i.  Remove the micro SD card from the PC


Connecting the Raspberry Pi 

	It is best to obtain a power supply that is designed to work with the raspberry pi, as some USB power supplies won't
	provide sufficient current, and the pi will not function properly.  Also, power supplies for raspberry pi 4 and above 
	have USB-C power connectors vs the USB Micro-B used for pi 3s and below. The two connectors are not interchangable.
	
	a.  Plug a USB keyboard into one of the USB connectors on the raspberry pi
	b.  Plug a USB mouse into one of the remaining free USB connectors
	c.  Connect an HDMI monitor to the HDMI port on the raspberry pi.  Please note that raspberry pi models below 4 have full-sized
	    HDMI connectors and raspberry pi 4's have micro HDMI connectors
	d.  Insert the micro SD card with raspberry pi OS image into the micro SD slot on the bottom of the raspberry pi    
	e.  Connect the power supply to the raspberry pi
	f.  Navigate through the configuration screens
	g.  Once the operating system is configured, reboot the raspberry pi
	h.  Open a command line terminal session and install apache and php with the following commands:
	
			sudo apt-get install apache2 -y
			sudo apt-get install php -y
			
	i.  Verify that apache is running by opening the browser on the raspberry pi, typing localhost in the address text box, 
	    and pressing Enter.  If it's working, the browser will display the apache welcome page.

Copying the siri.php file from github

	This github repository contains a file called siri.php.  This file reads imbedded information from the siri shortcuts, crafts 
	command strings, and sends them to the GXR-2.  Copy this file to the /var/www/html directory on the Raspberry Pi.  You can do 
	this one of two ways:  
	
	1.  First method
		a.  Open the file in the browser on the raspberry pi
		b.  Copy the contents
		c.  Open a local file on the pi using the text editor
		d.  Paste the contents into it
		e.  Save the contents in the /home/pi directory as siri.phpOpen a command line terminal session and enter the following command to copy the 			    siri.php file to the Apache home directory:
		    
		    cp siri.php /var/www/html/
		    	    
		f.  Open a command line terminal session and enter the following command to copy the siri.php file to the 
		    Apache home directory:
		    Open a command line terminal session and enter the following command to copy the siri.php file to the 
		    Apache home directory:
		    
		    cp siri.php /var/www/html/
		    cp siri.php /var/www/html/
		    
	2. Second method
		a.  Navigate to the files list for this repository (https://github.com/jrrussell750/Siri-for-Niles-GXR-2)
		b.  Click on the Code button in the upper right quadrant of the screen, and then click on the Download ZIP 
		    entry on the menu that displays.
		c.  Once the download has completed, unzip the file into the /home/pi directory
		d.  Open a command line terminal session and enter the following command to copy the siri.php file to the 
		    Apache home directory:
		    
		    cp siri.php /var/www/html/
		    
Connecting the wired LAN connection on the raspberry pi to the expansion connector on the Niles GXR-2

	a.  Connect one end of a straight-through ethernet patch cable from the wired LAN connector on the raspberry pi to 
	    the connector marked EXPANSION on the Niles GXR-2,  It is the RJ-45 female connector that is under the speaker 
	    connectors for Zone 1.  
	    
	b.  Using the ifconfig command, verify that the eth0 interface on the raspberry pi is receiving an IP address of 10.100.x.x 
	    from the DHCP server inside the GXR-2.  Please note that the GXR-2 has its own DHCP server.  If you attempt to connect
	    the GXR-2 to your network, that server will attempt to give IP addresses from the 10.100.x.x network to all 
	    devices that are using dynamic addressing.  That is why the raspberry pi must be directly connected to the GXR-2.


Creating and testing the first shortcut

	a.  Open the siri shortcuts app.
	b.  Press the plus sign (+) in the upper right corner of the app.
	c.  Click on Shortcut Name and type in a name that describes the shortcut.
	d.  Click on Add Action.  
	e.  In the search window that appears, type in Get Contents of URL.
	f.  Click on Get Contents of URL to select it.
	g.  Click on URL and enter the following:Open a command line terminal session and enter the following command to copy the siri.php file to the 
		    Apache home directory:
		    
		    cp siri.php /var/www/html/

	http://<enter ip address of your niles pi here>/siri.php?zone=<zone> Room&device=<device>
	
	For example:  http://192.168.0.100/siri.php?zone=1&device=3

        Note:  You’ll need to use IP, zone, and device names from your system.  Also, the names are case sensitive, so make sure they are spelled 
	and capitalized correctly.  You can also edit the zone and device names in the siri.php file to make it easier to refer to them in the URL.

	h.  Test your shortcut.  "hey siri <shortcut name>"
	
Once you've confirmed that everything is working properly, you can disconnect the keyboard, mouse, and monitor from the raspberry pi and run it headless.

 
